Lift Control System 
Module: ECM 1414 
 
 
 
Group Members and Student IDs: 
Sam Taylor-King 740026903 
Ted Turner 740013195
Dan Tamlyn 740062646
 
 
 
 
 
Date of submission: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction: 

Lift scheduling has important real-world applications, efficient algorithms must be designed to limit weight times for users, also there are risks that come with lifts and due to this edge cases must be handled to ensure no harm comes to users such as trapped on floors or lift to drop suddenly. 

 

Purpose of Project: We are aiming to create an efficient lift system which can deal with multiple users requests in queues and implement priorities weight limits and handle edge cases, preventing potential safety hazards, whilst delivering the intended service for users. 

 

Overview: This document will contain: 

 

Scope 
Objectives 
System Overview  
Specification  
 

 

Scope: Our algorithms will simulate lift movements using scan look and an algorithm of our choosing, the algorithms should handle different scenarios such as empty floors and invalid requests. We will design a look a can and a custom algorithm.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Objectives:  

Implement two 3 different algorithms to deal with lift requests, Scan, Look, My Lift 

Use a Queue data structure to manage incoming floor requests 

Weight capacity to prohibit people being taken on all at once  

Use metrics such as total time, average time to deal with request and total floors visited to analyse the efficacy of the algorithms  

Charts generated for easy Comparision 

 

System overview: 

 

The lift control system works by checking floor for requests and if requests are valid and lift has space it takes on board that person them, it repeats those at every floor, Aswell on that floor they check if there are any requests in that lift for the floor , if so they are dropped off , this continues till everyone is on their floor. Using a queue system to handle requests  

Key Goals: 

Handle all requests  
Minimise wait times  
Compare efficiency of algorithms  
Optimise movement 
 

Algorithms: 

Scan, Look, custom 

 

Key Features: 

Handle requests 

Implement algorithms 

Queue management  

Capacity limit edge case handling 

Track execution time   

High level flow diagram: 

 

Data Flow: 

Requests are scheduled on each floor, no live requests, algorithm iterates over the floor adding the requests to lift in order (Queue, first in first Out), lift moves in accordance to how the type of algorithm dictates e.g. scan will only change direction if it reaches top or bottom of floors. Once moved then will carry out checks and if valid will pick up new request or if possible, will drop any current requests in the lift. 

 

 

 

 

Specification: 

Data Structures:  

Queues: (FIFO), We implemented our queue's using pythons list, we treated them as queues by using/limiting the following operations. 

To enqueue, we used the .append() operation and this already add to the back of list so didnt need to specify where to append element. 

To deque, we used pop[0], pop removes element from the list and the 0 specifies the first element of that list which reflects the firsts in first out approach we were implementing. 

 

Lists allowed for a good representation of the queue data type we are aware that they are not optimised for queues due to inefficacy however they met the standards need for this project due to simplicity of implementation. 

 

Pseudo Code: 

Scan: 

Initialise the variable  
Lift, all requests are empty lists, max capacity is found and read in input file  
Start the time 

Define Scan algorithm, this handles the requests  

START SCAN 
 
For floor in range(0, top_floor): 

if there is space in lift and requests isn't on correct floor  

add them to lift  

if there are requests in lift that match the floor  

drop them off at the floor  

if lift reaches max capacity  

drop every one of at respective locations  

 

 

For floor in range(top_floor, 0, -1) 

if there is space in lift and requests isnt on correct floor  

add them to lift  

if there are requests in lift that match the floor  

drop them off at the floor  

if lift reaches max capacity  

drop every one of at respective locations 

3) END OF SCAN 

4)Display the final floors after processing  

5)Return the total time 

 

Look: 

making_list_of_requests(list_type_of_requests): IF length of list_type_of_requests then join into a string strip spaces and new lines at end of string seperate each element by ", " for all requests in list_type_of_requests add them to a temp list when added all requests to the temp list add the list of requests to all_requests ELIF the length of list_type_of_requests is 1 then remove the value from list_type_of_requests and then add list_type_of_requests to all_requests ELIF the length of list_type_of_requests is 0 then add the list_type_of_requests to all_requests 

isLiftFull(): IF the lifts capcity is equal to max return True ELSE return False 

is_floor_empty(floor_request): IF length of floor_request is 0 return True ELSE return False 

requests_completed(all_requests): FOR the requests in all_requests IF length of requests is 0 then add 1 onto floor completed starting from 0 IF floors_completed is equal to the floor of top floor then return True ELSE return False 

change_direction(current_floor, Up): IF current_floor is the top floor and lift going up then return True ELIF current_floor is 0 and lift is going down then return True ELSE return False 

leaving_lift(lift, current_floor): FOR people in lift IF request of person == current_floor add person to list of people leaving the lift FOR person in the list of people leaving remove person from lift return lift 

requests_in_direction_complete(all_requests, current_floor, Up): IF lift going up the difference is the top floor - current_floor FOR floors between current_floor and top floor if the floor has no requests left then take 1 from difference ELIF lift going down the difference is the current_floor FOR floors between current_floor and bottom floor if the floor has no requests left then take 1 from difference IF the difference is 0 then return True ELSE return False 

open the "input.txt" file and read it FOR each line in the file IF it is the first line in file then IF the characters are numbers then add them to a temp list amount_of_floors is first element of temp list capacity is second element of temp list ELIF there is a ":" in the line of file then index is the index of ":" in the line with each character being an element in a list IF the index is 1 then add first element of the line of file as a list in a temp list the floor is the first element of the temp list ELIF index larger than 1 then for all the characters between first character and ":" add to temp list then remove them from the line as a list IF the character is the one before ":" then remove the first element of the line as a list join the temp list together to get the floor number call making_list_of_requests function  

upLift(): first check if any people need to get off at current floor check if all requests have been completed and if lift is empty if both true then stop is lift is full IF not then add people to lift until full or floor empty IF full go to next floor IF all the requests are finished but people still in list keep going in direction IF lift is at top floor change direction repeat until hit top floor or all requests completed 

downLift(): first check if any people need to get off at current floor check if all requests have been completed and if lift is empty if both true then stop is lift is full IF not then add people to lift until full or floor empty IF full go to next floor IF all the requests are finished but people still in list keep going in direction IF lift is at top floor change direction repeat until hit bottom floor or all requests completed 

repeat upLift and downLift until lift is empty and all requests have been completed 

 

 

MYLIFT: 

Cant do yet  

 

Assumptions: 

No real time handling for requests, all our requests are pre-loaded beforehand, this doesn't accurately represent real world application as the same person who went to one floor may change their mind and want to go to another one after they have been there. 

 

Lift capacity is only thought about in a sense of number of people on lift however in reality it's the weight of people that effect the limit as you may have 3 people of quiet heavy weight they whey the same as 6 people of lower weight meaning u would be exceeding limit in both scenarios ,if capacity was 6. 

Floors are pre-determined, no dynamic changes can be made for changes in building configuration, although this doesn't seem like it has real world applications it could be considered in a sense of if people have access to certain floor or some are restricted then those people should have their own set amount of floors depending on access level. 

limitations: 

No implementation of priority cues means system cannot priorities certain passengers, for example if there are passengers who have been queuing of longer they should be dealt with first  

Scan algorithm has its own personal limitation, the fact it only changes direction at the top and bottom means if it has an instance such as if it picks up a passenger at 5 who wants to go to 6  they have to wait till they go down to bottom then go back up to 6 this also takes up space in the capacity further impacting the efficiency of the algorithm. 

 

Non addaptive schedulling, this is applicable in situations where we are dealing with live requests an example would be a rush in the amount of people requesting to go to or from certain floors, none of our algorithms use live requests thus making it efficient in these situations. 

Lack of multi lift support mean all requests are funnel through one system whereas if you were to implement multiple lifts it would lead to less traffic which would increase the efficiency. You could even implement different algorithms on each lift to further increase the efficiency. 

 

No Graphical user interface makes it harder to interact with the system Aswell as making it harder to debug and Analise. 

 

Algorithm specifications: 

Scan 

The algorithm uses lists to simulate the floors and uses nested loops to loop over floors of the building checking for pickups or drop offs the lift goes up and down and doesn't change direction, along with checks to handle the validity of requests such as invalid requests, if request is valid, it will check the capacity of lift if space available the person will be added to the lift. There are then checks within the lift to check if anyone needs to be dropped off at their floor originally it would drop them off even if they were at back of queue so to amend this, I have used pop [0] to ensure first in first out. My algorithm also prints out a message if this full this helped with de bug as was able to check if the lift ever filled up. If the lift fills up it drops off all passenger to respective floors before resuming usual service. The lift can handle change of direction by loping down wards once it reaches top floor which is pre-defined when we set up our floors by reading an input txt file. Once all requests are handled it shows the final floors and returns the t time which is used for testing and analysis  

Look: 

This algorithm also uses lists to simulate the floors and nested loops to loop to each floor of the bulding. The algorithm will try to drop off individuals who want to get off at the floor the lift is currently at and then allow for people to get on until the lift is at it's maximum capacity of people (no weight limit). Unlike the scan algorithm, when all the requests in the direction the lift is travelling in are finished AND the lift is empty it will then change the direction of the lift since people may want to get off at the floors that have no more requests. The algorithm only returns the time taken.

C-Scan: the lift operates in cycles goes upwards picking up passengers and dropping them off at there floors if they are at front of the queue once it reaches the top of the floors it orders the list from lowest to highest's and starts back again from the bottom floor , this repeats till all requests are sorted.  


 

 

 

 
Results: 

Scan 

Mean:8.04 

SD:1.1 

The results from mean show us that the average test time was 8s , this is expected due to the nature of the algorithm due to it having to visit every floor and not being 

to change direction at top or bottom it has a standard deviation of 1.1,this tells us the algorithm is consistently handling cases well and is stable, the  variation 

coefficient is 13.7% which is good this backs up that the algorithm is good at handling edge cases. 

Look 

Mean:5.2079 

 
SD:1.05 

We have an average test run time of 5.2s, for an algorithm for look this is normally as it will perform more efficiently as it will be able to complete requests quicker

due to dynamic change in direction.Standered deviation for this algorithm was 1.05, showing that it's a stable algorithm and has a relatively consistent time to complete

the test, allowing us to interpret that its able to handle edge cases with relative ease. The coefficient of variation is 20.2%further backing up our thoughts.  

C-scan  

Mean:1.47 

SD:1.96 

1.96s average shows how efficient the algorithm is this is due to the nature of C-Scan , the sorting queue means that no one that can be dropped off is ever waiting too 

long to be dropped off as once they get to their floor there shouldn't be anyone Infront of them as queue is ordered lowest to highest. However the Standard deviation is 

1.96 which is higher than the mean this shows its rely inefficient when. Handling edge cases, the coefficient if variation of 133.33% confirms this. The reults suggest the 

algorith is susceptible to certain workload layouts ,this is clear from the nature of the algorithm as if u were to have high numbers at bottom and the list doesn't get 

sorted till it reaches top then due to queueing system it will block requests from being fulfilled. 

 

 
 

Final Discussion: 

The C-Scan results show that this algorithm is much more efficient than the other two algorithms as it has a smaller mean of only ~0.15s and a very small standard deviation, showing that all tests finish in a very similar time frame, suggesting that the use of priority queue has made the algorithm much more optimal.

 

 

 

 

 

Group collaboration statement: 

Task Description Recommended Perso Specification Document Writing the coursework specification, including requirements, objectives, assumptions, pseudocode, Generative AI statement, and system design. Sam, spell check + grammar Ted 

Report Writing Dan 

Algorithm Implementation (SCAN, LOOK, MYLIFT) Implementing at least two algorithms + one custom algorithms for optimization. Sam (Scan), ( Will(look)) + louis (our algorithm of choice) 

Code for handling input, 

Simulation & Testing Designing scenarios, constraints (lift capacity, travel time), running simulations, collecting data. Will 

Results & Analysis Generating charts/graphs, comparing algorithm efficiency, interpreting results. Louis/ted 

Video Presentation Creating slides, recording, and editing the video presentation (all members participate). Ted editing + script writing, all contribute 

Final Documentation & Submission Compiling final PDF, structuring folders, writing README, ensuring all files are included. 1 person (final review & submission) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AI use declaration  

Please edit this cell and fill the boxes accordingly. 

AI-supported use is permitted in this assessment. I acknowledge the following uses of GenAI tools in this assessment: 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools for developing ideas. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to assist with research or gathering information. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to help me understand key theories and concepts. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to identify trends and themes as part of my data analysis. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to suggest a plan or structure for my assessment. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to give me feedback on a draft. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tool to generate image, figures or diagrams. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to proofread and correct grammar or spelling errors. 

[NO] I have used GenAI tools to generate citations or references. 

[NO] Other [please specify] 

[NO] I have not used any GenAI tools in preparing this assessment. 

[NO] I declare that I have referenced use of GenAI outputs within my assessment in line with the University referencing guidelines. 

Please note that submitting your work without an accompanying declaration, or one with no ticked boxes, will be considered a declaration that you have not used GenAI tools in preparing your work. 

 

Signed By: 

Sam Taylor-King 

Ted Turner

Dan Tamlyn
